William Richard Keating (born September 6, 1952) is an American politician who has served as a U.S. Representative from Massachusetts since 2011. He is a Democrat representing the state's 9th district which includes Cape Cod and the South Coast. Keating raised his profile advocating for criminal justice issues in the state legislature before becoming district attorney (DA) of Norfolk County, where he served three terms prior to his election to Congress.
Born and raised in Sharon, Massachusetts, Keating "took a traditional route to politics," attending Boston College and Suffolk University Law School. As a resident of Sharon he was elected to the Massachusetts House of Representatives in 1976 and went on to serve in the state Senate from 1985 to 1999. He authored numerous bills signed into law concerning taxation, drug crime, and sentencing reform. His attempted overthrow of Senate President William M. Bulger in 1994 was a failure but boosted his local name recognition, which contributed to his success in the 1998 election for DA.
Keating followed the path of former Norfolk District Attorney Bill Delahunt to Congress, winning election in 2010 to represent the 10th district. In 2012, after redistricting combined his district with that of fellow incumbent Stephen Lynch, Keating chose to run in the "incumbent-free" 9th district, where he was elected to a second term. As of the 115th Congress (2017–2018), Keating sits on the House Homeland Security Committee and the Foreign Affairs Committee. Much of his work has focused on domestic issues central to his district, such as the fishing industry and nuclear safety.


== Early life, education, and law career ==
Keating was born in Norwood, Massachusetts in 1952 to Anna (Welch) of Foxborough, Massachusetts and William B. Keating of Sharon, Massachusetts. Graduating from Sharon High School, Keating enrolled in Boston College where he received his Bachelor of Arts in 1974, and his Master of Business Administration in 1982. In 1985 Keating earned his Juris Doctor from Suffolk University Law School and passed the bar exam. Keating later became a partner at the law firm of Keating & Fishman.


== Massachusetts General Court ==


=== House of Representatives ===
In 1977 Keating was elected to the Massachusetts House of Representatives from the 19th Norfolk district, where he served for a year, and was later elected from the 8th Norfolk district, serving from 1979 to 1984. He was a supporter of George Keverian in his successful 1985 effort to overthrow Thomas W. McGee as Speaker of the House. By the end of his House tenure, Keating became vice chairman of the House Criminal Justice Committee.


=== Senate ===
In 1984, state Sen. Joseph F. Timilty resigned his Norfolk and Suffolk seat to pursue a career in private law, and Keating became the only major Democratic contender for the office. In the general election he faced Republican Marion Boch, who promoted a plan for dramatic cuts to legislators' pay and hours, invoking the energy of the Ronald Reagan campaign.
Keating focused his campaign on expanding resources for crime prevention and education, tailoring his message to the Boston constituency he would pick up as a senator. He was successful, winning about 64 percent of the vote, and was sworn in the following January.In his first year, he was named Senate chairman of the joint Public Safety Committee, where he led the legislative action for a statewide seat belt law pushed by Governor Michael Dukakis. He authored a drug sentencing reform package signed into law in 1988, lowering thresholds for possession charges and establishing new minimum sentences, including a one-year minimum sentence for first-time possession of cocaine or PCP "with intent to distribute". The latter provision was widely derided by criminal justice authorities as excessively strict and vaguely worded.Redistricting eventually placed Keating in the Norfolk and Bristol seat (1989–1994). As a vice chairman of the joint Criminal Justice Committee, Keating was a lead author of a 1991 sentencing reform bill, signed into law by Governor William Weld, that made it easier to try juveniles as adults and pass harsher sentences in the case of major crimes, especially murder. "What is occurring is a shift away from the rehabilitative stance to a focus on the seriousness of the crime committed by the juvenile," said Keating. In 1992, as co-chairman of the Taxation Committee, he successfully pushed a proposal to phase out the Massachusetts estate tax.In 1994 Keating led a group of liberals in a failed coup to remove state Senate President William Bulger, a fellow Democrat, from his position. Keating, a staunch liberal relative to the more socially conservative Bulger, sought to reform the Senate rules to greatly reduce the president's power. Bulger, who had held the Senate gavel for 15 years, exerted strict control over the body's operations, but was gradually losing his power base with new crops of Democratic freshmen replacing his longtime allies. Keating's campaign failed, but he said during his 2010 election campaign: "The thought that I took on the most powerful person in Massachusetts, risking my whole career, a member of my own party, is something that is resonating in this campaign, that helps define me as independent."Further redistricting landed Keating in the Norfolk, Bristol, and Plymouth district from 1995 to 1998. Throughout his Senate tenure, Keating served as Chairman of the Judiciary Committee, Chairman of the Committee on Taxation, and Vice Chairman of the Committee on Criminal Justice; he also served as the Senate Chairman of the Committee on Public Safety and Chairman of the Steering and Policy Committee.


== District attorney ==
Speculation emerged in early 1997 that Keating was planning a run for district attorney (DA) of Norfolk County. He faced two former Norfolk assistant DAs, John J. Corrigan and William P. O'Donnell, in the Democratic primary. Keating, whose name recognition was boosted by the attempted Bulger coup, presented his work on public safety, criminal justice, and judiciary committees as a strength, while the other candidates pointed to his lack of courtroom experience as a disqualifier. While Keating held a part-time law practice during his legislative career, he lacked exposure to the criminal cases handled by the DA's office.After winning the Democratic nomination, Keating faced incumbent DA Jeffrey A. Locke in the November 1998 general election. Locke, a Republican, had been appointed to the position by Governor Weld the previous year after the resignation of Bill Delahunt. With years of experience as a prosecutor, Locke portrayed Keating as a career politician and echoed his primary opponents' criticism of his experience. Keating highlighted a range of endorsements from police organizations, and from Delahunt, as evidence of his criminal justice qualifications. Aided by a Democratic-leaning electorate, Keating won the election with around 55 percent of the vote.Upon taking office in January 1999, he immediately replaced two top officials, and one-third of the remaining staff were replaced or left voluntarily. Press reports criticized the move as overly political and aggressive, particularly as it affected ongoing trials.In his first year, he founded the Norfolk Anti-Crime Council, a 35-member forum for judicial officers, police, and other local parties to discuss and co-ordinate anti-crime strategies. He established a pilot program for a drug court under Quincy District Court, which would provide an alternative sentencing pathway for nonviolent drug offenders, in an effort to reduce court backlogs and lower recidivism rates. He also expanded his office's juvenile crime unit. In late 2000 he laid the groundwork for the Norfolk Country Children's Advocacy Center, based on similar programs in Middlesex and Suffolk counties, and it was fully established the following year. Keating's office also began an anti-bullying program in spring 2001.In 2002, his office was the first in Massachusetts to win a murder conviction in a case that lacked a victim's body.In advance of the 2002 elections, he was seen as a likely contender to succeed deceased Rep. Joe Moakley in the U.S. House of Representatives, but he opted to run for a second term as DA instead, and was unopposed for re-election. He won a third term, still unopposed, in 2006.


== U.S. House of Representatives ==


=== Elections ===
With incumbent U.S. Representative Bill Delahunt choosing to retire, Keating declared his candidacy in the 2010 congressional election. In order to run for Delahunt's 10th district seat, Keating moved from his longtime home in Sharon (located in the neighboring 4th district) to a rental property in Quincy.On September 14, he won the Democratic primary against state senator Robert O'Leary. Keating faced Republican state Representative Jeff Perry in the general election. In the wake of the Tea Party movement and the election of Republican U.S. Senator Scott Brown, the campaign was unusually close for a modern Massachusetts race, which would normally skew heavily Democratic. The Keating campaign largely focused on a 1991 incident during Perry's tenure as a police sergeant, in which a teenage girl had been illegally strip-searched by another officer while Perry was on the scene. The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee ran a widely aired advertisement highlighting the incident and challenging Perry's character. With 47 percent of the vote, Keating defeated Perry (42 percent) and two independents in the November 2 election.With the state poised to lose a congressional seat after the 2010 census, lawmakers released a redistricting plan in November 2011 that placed Keating into the same congressional district as Stephen Lynch. Under the plan, the cities of Quincy and other upper South Shore towns were placed into Lynch's district, potentially forcing a primary between the two lawmakers. Rather than challenge Lynch, Keating chose to move to his summer home on Cape Cod in order to run in an "incumbent-free" district. Keating defeated Bristol County District Attorney Samuel Sutter in the September 6 Democratic primary, and in November 2012 he defeated Republican Christopher Sheldon to win a second term in the U.S. House.


=== Tenure ===

Keating is considered a liberal by national standards. In 2012, the National Journal ranked Keating as "the 84th most liberal member of the House", but second only to Stephen Lynch as the most conservative of the Massachusetts House delegation.In February 2017, Keating was named by the National Republican Congressional Committee as one of 36 top Democratic targets for the 2018 elections. The hope of Republicans is to gain seats in the mid-term election by challenging in blue-collar parts of the country.Keating is a member of the New Democrat Coalition, the House Baltic Caucus, and the Congressional Arts Caucus.


==== Economic issues and budget ====
Issues specific to his South Coast and Cape Cod–based district, such as maritime policy, have been a major target of Keating's work. In June 2012, he organized the Federal Fishing Advisory Board, a body to research and address fisheries management concerns between lawmakers and industry stakeholders.In 2012, he and other Massachusetts representatives pushed the Commerce Department to issue a federal disaster declaration for fisheries in the northeastern U.S., which would open up the opportunity for financial aid.In the wake of Hurricane Sandy, he proposed to redirect $111 million of relief funding to fisheries throughout the country, although the proposal was not adopted by the House Rules Committee.When the Nuclear Regulatory Commission considered a 20-year contract extension for the Pilgrim Nuclear Generating Station in Plymouth in mid-2012, Keating repeatedly took to the press. He at first declined to take a position on the plant's re-authorization, stating, "I wouldn't be the right person to ask and that's why we have regulatory authorities and people with expertise to deal with that." When the commission voted to renew the license, Keating joined other Massachusetts politicians in deriding the decision as premature.During a labor strike later in the year, Keating joined U.S. Representative Ed Markey in challenging the qualifications of the plant's replacement workers.Along with U.S. Senator John Kerry, Keating helped to finalize the cleanup and sale of portions of a defunct naval air base in South Weymouth to private developers. The deal, reached in November 2011, was a linchpin for the SouthField development project.Keating has stressed his opposition to Social Security reductions such as raising the retirement age or privatizing the program, and supported a cost-of-living adjustment announced by the Social Security Administration in 2011.In 2011, Keating had a 100% voting record with the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL–CIO), backing all 29 endorsed bills. During 2012, Keating voted in favor of 10 of 12 AFL-CIO backed bills, with the two opposing votes dealing with small business startups and swap dealer exclusions.Overall, Keating's has support 95% of AFL-CIO endorsed legislation. Keating also received an 0% rating from the anti-union WorkPlaceChoice.org. He voted "nay" on the NLRB Prohibitions Bill in November 2011.


==== Foreign affairs and defense ====
Keating sits on the House Homeland Security Committee as well as the Foreign Affairs Committee, where he is the ranking member of the Europe, Eurasia and Emerging Threats Subcommittee. He joined a Congressional delegation to Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iraq, shortly after the 2011 execution of Osama Bin Laden.After TSA officers in Boston were accused of racial profiling in 2012, he requested a Homeland Security Committee hearing into the accusations.


==== Social issues ====
A Women's Advisory Board for the 10th Congressional District was founded by Keating in January 2011, with hopes of gaining insight into how best to serve the women in the 10th District.From October 18–21, 2011, he hosted "Women's Week" in the district, with events focusing on topics such as breast cancer awareness, domestic violence, and female entrepreneurship.Keating is pro-choice, and during his tenure in the House has voted against the Protect Life Act and the No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion Act.In 2010, Keating received a rating of 0% from Massachusetts Citizens for Life. In 1997, he was rated 100% by NARAL Pro-Choice Massachusetts, and during the same year, he received a 100% rating from the Massachusetts National Organization for Women.Keating is a supporter of gay rights. He supported ending the Don't Ask Don't Tell policy and has promised to push nationwide anti-discrimination laws and marriage rights for gays and lesbians. In July 2011, he recorded a video supporting LGBT youth in Massachusetts in conjunction with other members of Massachusetts' Congressional Delegation and the It Gets Better Project.During his 2010 campaign for the United States House, he promised to increase federal firearm regulations. His proposed changes included closing a loophole that allows people on the FBI Terrorist Watch List to buy guns and requiring child safety trigger locks on all guns sold in the US.  Keating voted "nay" on a bill to require any state offering right-to-carry permits to recognize such permits issued in other states.


=== Legislation ===
Keating and then-U.S. Rep. Aaron Schock (R-IL) jointly introduced the Equitable Access to Care and Health Act (H.R. 1814; 113th Congress) on April 29, 2013. The bill would amend the Internal Revenue Code, with respect to minimum essential health care coverage requirements added by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, to allow an additional religious exemption from such requirements for individuals whose sincerely held religious beliefs would cause them to object to medical health care provided under such coverage. Individuals could file an affidavit to get this exemption, but would lose the exemption if they went on to later use healthcare. Schock and Keating wrote a letter in support of their bill saying, "we believe the EACH Act balances a respect for religious diversity against the need to prevent fraud and abuse."


== Personal life ==
Keating and his wife, Tevis, live in Bourne, Massachusetts. They have two adult children: Kristen Keating and Patrick Keating.


== References ==


== External links ==
Congressman Bill Keating official U.S. House site
Bill Keating for Congress
Bill Keating at Curlie (based on DMOZ)

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress