Darren Michael Soto (born February 25, 1978) is an American attorney and politician from Orlando, Florida, who is the U.S. Representative for Florida's 9th district. He defeated Republican Wayne Liebnitzky in the 2016 general election, 57-43%. Prior to being elected to Congress, Soto served for four years in the Florida Senate and five in the Florida House of Representatives, representing parts of the Orlando area.


== Early life and education ==
Soto was born in the borough of Ringwood, New Jersey, to a Puerto Rican father, O. Lou Soto, and an Italian-American mother, Jean Soto. From 1998 to 2001, he worked for Prudential Insurance in finance while he attended college. He received a Bachelor of Arts degree from Rutgers University in 2000, a Juris Doctor from  George Washington University in 2004, and opened his law practice the following year.
Soto has a bachelor's degree in economics, and attended law school at George Washington University. In 2006, he was named class counsel in the federal class action brought on behalf of Hispanic voters against the City of Kissimmee in the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Florida.
Soto is a former member of the Civil Service Board for the City of Orlando. He served as the Treasurer of the Orange County Democrats and the Vice President of Communications for the Orange County Young Democrats (YD's). He was also the YD Co-Host for their Speak Easy events that provide a monthly forum for local and state leaders to speak to young voters.
"My family's history is the Puerto Rican history in Florida," Soto has said.


== Florida House of Representatives ==
In 2006, Soto ran for the Florida House of Representatives from the 40th District, unsuccessfully challenging incumbent Andy Gardiner. In April 2007, he emerged victorious from a crowded Democratic primary in a special election to replace John Quinones, who had resigned to run for the Osceola County Commission. In the general election, Soto defeated Tony Suarez, the Republican nominee, by 285 votes. Soto was overwhelmingly re-elected in 2008 and 2010.During his three terms in the Florida House, Soto supported laws to curb illegal street racing, protect families of deceased firefighters, and maintain school safety. He fought to protect homeowners' access to the courts in foreclosure proceedings and to assure adequate funding to address the unprecedented housing crisis in Florida. Soto was a key voice in securing the passage of Sunrail to bring commuter rail to Central Florida.


== Florida Senate ==
In 2012, Florida Senate districts were redrawn, and Soto opted not to run for re-election in the House but instead to run for the newly created 14th District, which included predominantly Latino areas of Orange, Osceola, and Polk Counties. He won his party's nomination uncontested and faced Republican Will McBride. Soto defeated McBride with over 70% of the vote.In his first term in the Florida Senate in 2013, Soto played a major role in the passage of legislation that would have expedited driver's license access for DREAMers, but it was ultimately vetoed by Governor Rick Scott, setting off statewide protests. He also played a critical role in reducing the statute of limitations from 5 years to 1 year for banks to collect foreclosure debt and helped establish Florida's Hardest Hit Principal Reduction Program. He unsuccessfully proposed an amendment that would "raise the required jury vote from seven to 10 for death penalties."In 2014, Soto passed legislation answering the Florida Supreme Court's call to give it the authority to admit immigrant lawyers to the Florida Bar. He also strongly advocated legislation giving DREAMers in-state college tuition. He secured the initial state funding to establish a Poinciana Valencia Campus and to initiate the Lake Toho Restoration, which will clean water flowing through the Northern Everglades. In addition, he led the Democratic House and Senate Caucuses in drafting a Congressional Map during the 2014 Special Session on Redistricting.During the 2015 legislative session, Soto was fundamental in securing $11.9M in funding for Valencia College's Poinciana campus. Soto also successfully pushed for $20M to restore the Kissimmee River. This earned him the "Champion of the Everglades" award from the Audubon Society of Florida. Soto also proposed legislation to ban fracking in Florida. He secured $10M in Florida's budget to promote economic growth in Osceola County for a new facility to manufacture high-tech sensors. However, the project was vetoed by Governor Rick Scott. Soto also introduced a bill to boost minimum teacher pay to $50,000 per year.Senator Soto steered funding to his district, including $15M for the UCF Sensors Manufacturing Center, $12M to complete the construction of the Poinciana Valencia College campus, $4M in supplemental school construction money, $750k for the Northern Everglades and Lake Toho initiatives and $150k for a transition house that offers temporary housing for veterans. In 2016, Soto supported Chloe's Law to construct barriers around water bodies adjacent to state roads, the Deaf Floridian's ID bill, and the Juvenile Clean Slate bill which automatically seals misdemeanor records for juveniles who reach 21 years of age and do not reoffend as adults.


== U.S. House of Representatives ==


=== Elections ===


==== 2016 ====
Soto won the Democratic nomination to succeed Rep. Alan Grayson, who had stepped down to run in the primary for U.S. Senate in Florida's 9th congressional district. Soto earned 36% of the vote in a four-way primary election. The district is Democratic-leaning and contains all of Osceola County and parts of Orange and Polk counties. Soto has represented the majority of this district while serving in the Florida House of Representatives and the Florida Senate. The Orlando Sentinel endorsed him in his primary race, calling him an "effective lawmaker." Soto won the general election for the seat, defeating Republican Wayne Liebnitzky, 57-43%.


==== 2018 ====
Soto successfully defeated his predecessor, Alan Grayson, with a 32% margin of victory. Soto received endorsements from almost every Democratic organization in his reelection campaign: National Organization for Women, Pride Fund to End Gun Violence, Giffords PAC, Democratic Environmental Caucus of Florida, National Committee to Preserve Social Security & Medicare, Equality PAC, League of Conservation Voters, Human Rights Campaign, Florida AFL-CIO, Florida Young Democrats, Orlando Professional Fire Fighters International Association of Fire Fighters Local 1365, Central Florida Police Benevolent Association, Florida LGBTA Democratic Caucus, eMgage PAC, Congressional Progressive Caucus PAC, and Planned Parenthood. Soto also has the backing of Vice President Joe Biden, Congressman John Lewis, Congresswoman Linda Sanchez, Florida State Senator Vic Torres, along with every Florida Democratic Member of Congress.Congressman Soto will face Republican candidate Wayne Liebnitzky in the general election.


=== 115th Congress (2017-2018) ===


=== Tenure ===
Soto is the first Congressman of Puerto Rican descent elected from Florida. In his first few weeks, Soto was named by Nancy Pelosi as one of only three freshmen Members to the Democratic Steering and Policy Committee. He was also named co-chair of the House Democratic Caucus New Economy Task Force.On December 23, 2017, Soto passed his second bill the "Foreign Spill Protection Act" along with co-introducer US Rep. Carlos Curbelo. The bill eliminates a $1 Billion cap on damages for foreign oil drillers, whose oil spills pollute America’s waters, to better protect Florida’s beautiful coasts.Soto introduced a bill to rename a Kissimmee Post Office (HR 4042) at 1415 West Oak St after the Borinqueneers. Recently this bill passed both chambers of Congress and was signed into law on March 23, 2018. The Borinqueneers were a U.S Army segregated unit of Puerto Ricans who fought in WWI, WWII and Korean War with great distinction and valor. In 2014, they were honored with the Congressional Gold Medal for their brave service to our country.Congressman Soto passed a law to protect billfish, such as marlin, spearfish, and sailfish. H.R. 4528 closes a loophole in the Billfish Conservation Act making it illegal to sell billfish in the continental United States. The law passed the U.S. House on June 25, 2018 and was signed into law on August 2, 2018.


=== Committee assignments ===
Committee on Agriculture
Subcommittee on Commodity Exchanges, Energy, and Credit
Subcommittee on Nutrition
Committee on Natural Resources
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources
Subcommittee on Indian, Insular and Alaska Native Affairs
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations


=== Caucuses ===
Congressional Progressive Caucus
New Democrat Coalition
Congressional Hispanic Caucus


== Political positions ==


=== Immigration ===
Soto is a staunch advocate for DREAMers and is working with fellow members of the Hispanic Caucus to pass the DREAM Act. In June 2018, Congressman Soto traveled to Homestead, Florida to tour a detention facility with several Democratic Members of Congress where he argued against Trump's zero tolerance policy and the separation of children and families. He has been the strongest advocate in Congress for Alejandra Juarez, the wife of an Iraq combat veteran and mother of two American daughters, who was deported to Mexico recently due to Trump's zero tolerance policy. "Zero tolerance literally ripped this family apart," said Rep. Darren Soto "The administration is so extreme on immigration that they’re deporting the spouses of military veterans."


=== Environmental Policy ===
Darren is officially the greenest Member of the Florida Congressional Delegation for 2017. He received a perfect score of 100 for his environmental issues voting record from the National League of Conservation Voters. He introduced the Wild and Scenic River Study Act of 2017 (H.R.3961), which passed unanimously out of committee on January 17, 2018. On April 16, 2018, this bill passed unanimously out of the U.S. House. Soto led strong opposition to Trump Administration proposals to permit oil drilling off Florida's Gulf and Atlantic coasts during the House Committee on Natural Resources meetings. Soto has also championed funding increases for the National Estuary Program the National Wildlife Refuge System program.On June 6, 2018, Soto passed his Shark and Billfish Protection Act out of House Natural Resources Committee. Senator Bill Nelson passed the Senate companion bill on October 2, 2017.


=== Gun control ===
Soto received an "A" rating from the NRA in 2012, but his views on the Second Amendment changed after the 2012 Newtown Shooting. In the Florida Senate, he became a reliable vote for gun safety, which ultimately led to earning a "D" rating from the NRA for his service there from 2013-2016.After the Pulse tragedy, Soto called for a special session to prevent those on the FBI's No Fly List from purchasing firearms.Since 2017 to present, he has been a reliable vote for gun safety reform. After the February 2018 Marjorie Stoneman Douglas High School Shooting, he proposed his "Gun Safety Action Plan." He listed five steps: universal background checks for gun purchases, keeping guns away from those who are a danger to themselves or others, banning assault weapons and bump stocks, creating a "red-flag" system to issue gun restraining orders, and disallowing anyone on the federal terrorism "no-fly" list from buying a gun.Following the Stoneman Douglas High School shooting in Florida in 2018, Soto stated that gun control will be "one of those litmus test issues" in the 2018 midterms.


=== Hurricane safety ===
Working with Senator Bill Nelson, Soto passed his first law in Congress on April 18, 2017 creating a backup fleet of hurricane hunter aircraft to monitor hurricanes affecting Florida and other nearby areas.


=== Recovery assistance ===
Soto is working on debt reduction and tax, healthcare, agriculture and small business relief to assist Puerto Rico in its economic recovery. He also successfully led a bipartisan letter requesting FEMA Designation of Individual Assistance for the citizens of Orange, Osceola, Polk, Lake and Seminole counties after Hurricane Irma. In 2018, he voted to bring back billions of dollars in recovery funding to Central Florida and Puerto Rico following Hurricanes Irma and Maria.


== Personal life ==
On April 1, 2018, Soto's wife, Amanda Soto, was arrested at Walt Disney World and charged with disorderly intoxication. In a statement, Darren Soto said his wife had been in treatment for depression for years and had recently stopped taking medication in accordance with her treatment plan and under her doctor's supervision. He went on to say that "she deeply regrets her actions and takes full responsibility for them."


== See also ==
List of Hispanic Americans in the United States Congress


== References ==


== External links ==
Congressman Darren Soto official U.S. House website
Campaign website
Darren Soto at Curlie (based on DMOZ)

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress
Appearances on C-SPAN
Florida House of Representatives Profile