Deborah Ann Dingell (; née Insley; born November 23, 1953) is an American Democratic Party politician who has been the U.S. Representative for Michigan's 12th congressional district since 2015. She is the wife of John Dingell, the longest-serving U.S. congressperson. She worked as a consultant to the American Automobile Policy Council. She was a superdelegate for the 2012 Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, North Carolina.She is active in several Michigan and Washington, D.C., charities and serves on a number of charitable boards.  She is a founder and past chair of the National Women’s Health Resource Center and the Children's Inn at the National Institutes of Health (NIH). She is also a member of the Board of Directors for Vital Voices Global Partnership. She is a 1975 graduate of the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University.


== Life and career ==

Descended from one of the Fisher brothers, owners of Fisher Body, a GM founder, she has served as president  of the General Motors Foundation and as executive director of Global Community Relations and Government Relations at GM.
She married Michigan Congressman John Dingell, 28 years her senior, in 1981; she is Dingell's second wife. She had grown up as a Republican, but became a Democrat soon after marrying Dingell.
She is a member of the Democratic National Committee from Michigan and chaired Vice President Al Gore’s campaign in Michigan in 2000. In 2004, she also helped secure the Michigan Democratic primary and general election vote for John Kerry in Michigan.
In November 2006, Dingell was elected to the Board of Governors of Wayne State University in Detroit.Dingell and U.S. Senator Carl Levin (D – MI) were the proponents of moving up Michigan's presidential primary before February 5, to attempt to garner greater political influence for Michigan during the 2008 Democratic primaries. This resulted in Michigan almost losing its delegates' votes in the Democratic National Convention.John Dingell became the longest-serving member of the United States House of Representatives in June 2013 and continued serving up until the end of the 113th Congress in January 2015.
When Carl Levin announced his retirement from the U.S. Senate at the end of his term in 2015, Dingell indicated that she was interested in running for his seat. When former Michigan governor Jennifer Granholm declined to run for the seat, a Politico writer declared Dingell to be one of the front-runners for the Democratic nomination, alongside Representative Gary Peters. However, she chose not to run, and Gary Peters was elected to Levin's seat.
In 2018, Dingell introduced a law that would give the Consumer Product Safety Commission the authority to recall defective firearms. Her husband, John Dingell, was a key lawmaker that initially granted the firearms industry this exemption from the 1972 Consumer Product Safety Act that created the Consumer Product Safety Commission.


== U.S. House of Representatives ==


=== 2014 election ===

Dingell indicated that she planned to run for her husband's congressional seat after he announced his retirement. On August 5 she won the Democratic primary. On November 4 she won the general election, defeating Republican Terry Bowman.  When Dingell was sworn in, she became the first U.S. non-widowed woman in Congress to succeed her husband – who is the longest-serving member of Congress in history with 59 years served. His father, John Dingell Sr., held  Michigan's 12th district for 22 years before his son won it. All together the Dingells have held one of Michigan's districts for a total of 85 years as of 2018.


=== Committee assignments ===
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Subcommittee on Communications and Technology
Subcommittee on Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection
Subcommittee on EnvironmentShe is a member of the Congressional Progressive Caucus and the Congressional Arts Caucus.


== See also ==
Women in the United States House of Representatives


== References ==


== External links ==
Debbie Dingell official U.S. House site
Debbie Dingell for Congress
Debbie Dingell at Curlie (based on DMOZ)

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress
Appearances on C-SPAN