Raymond Eugene Green (born October 17, 1947) is an American politician who is the U.S. Representative for Texas's 29th congressional district, serving since 1993. He is a member of the Democratic Party. His district includes most of eastern Houston, along with large portions of Houston's eastern suburbs.
In November 2017, Green announced that he would retire from Congress at the end of his current term, and not run for re-election in 2018.


== Early life, education, and early career ==
Green was born in Houston and he graduated from the University of Houston, earning a bachelor's degree in business administration in 1971 and a law degree in 1977. He held positions as a business manager and a private attorney prior to his election to Congress.


== Texas legislature ==
Green was first elected to the Texas House of Representatives in 1972. He was elected to the Texas Senate in 1985.


== U.S. House of Representatives ==


=== Elections ===
Green was first elected to the U.S. House in 1992.  Although the 29th was (then as now) drawn as a majority-Hispanic district, Green finished second in the five-way Democratic primary, behind city councilman Ben Reyes.  Green defeated Reyes in the runoff by only 180 votes, all but assuring him of election in this heavily Democratic district.  Green was reelected 12 times, never facing substantive electoral opposition.  He ran unopposed in 1998, 2002 and 2004.
On November 13 Green announced his retirement. He later endorsed State Senator Sylvia Garcia, who now represented his old state senate district (and who finished third in the 1992 Democratic primary) as his successor. Garcia went on to win the primary.


=== Tenure ===
Green is the only non-Hispanic white Democrat representing a significant portion of Houston, and one of only three in the entire Texas delegation (the others being Lloyd Doggett and Beto O'Rourke).
Since 1996, Green has been a member of the powerful House Energy and Commerce Committee. In 2011, he became Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Environment and the Economy. He also serves on the Subcommittee on Energy and Power and the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations.


=== Legislative issues ===
Since being elected to the House of Representatives, Green has been working on education, labor, energy, domestic manufacturing, health issues, NASA's Johnson Space Center, and Social Security and veterans benefits. He has worked to improve access to quality health care, support initiatives to improve our economy and increased job training, and maintain financial aid for students.
Congressman Green voted in favor of the Iraq Resolution in 2002, and gave a speech on the house floor linking Saddam Hussein to the September 11 attacks in 2001. Despite the Democratic leadership's general disapproval of the war, Green voted against measures aimed at placing a timetable on military withdrawal.
In September 2004, he proposed the Every Vote Counts Amendment, which would have abolished the U.S. electoral college in United States presidential elections.
Congressman Green has also proposed legislation addressing domestic and global electronic waste (e-waste) concerns. H.R. 2284, The Responsible Electronics Recycling Act of 2011, was introduced in the 112th Congress to prohibit the exportation of some electronics whose improper disposal may create environmental, health, or national security risks.
Green also served on the Energy and Commerce Committee's Subcommittee on Health during drafting of the Affordable Care Act of 2010 and helped write and amend the legislation.  Since then, he has worked for increased access to affordable and quality health care.


=== Committee assignments ===
Committee on Energy and Commerce
Subcommittee on Energy and Power
Subcommittee on Environment and Economy
Subcommittee on Health (Ranking Member)
Subcommittee on Oversight and InvestigationsCaucus membershipsCongressional Arts Caucus
Congressional Vision Caucus
Afterschool Caucuses
Congressional NextGen 9-1-1 Caucus


== References ==


== External links ==
Congressman Gene Green official U.S. House site
Gene Green for Congress
Gene Green at Curlie (based on DMOZ)

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress
Appearances on C-SPAN
World Energy Television Interview Gene Green on WorldEnergySource.com World Energy Television