Jamin Ben "Jamie" Raskin (born December 13, 1962) is an American author and politician serving as the U.S. Representative for Maryland's 8th congressional district since 2017. The district is anchored in Montgomery County, an affluent suburban county northwest of Washington, D.C..
As a law professor, he taught constitutional law and legislation at the American University and the Washington College of Law. He served as the director of the college's LL.M. program on Law and Government until his election to Congress.


== Early life ==
Raskin was born in Washington, D.C. on December 13, 1962 to a Jewish family, the son of progressive activist Marcus Raskin, a former staff aide to President John F. Kennedy on the National Security Council and co-founder of the Institute for Policy Studies, and Barbara (née Bellman) Raskin, a journalist and novelist. He graduated from Georgetown Day School in 1979, received his B.A. degree from Harvard College (magna cum laude) in 1983, and received his J.D. degree from Harvard Law School (magna cum laude) in 1987. He is a past editor of the Harvard Law Review.


== Maryland legislature ==
In November 2006, he was elected as a Maryland State Senator for District 20, representing parts of Silver Spring and Takoma Park in Montgomery County. In 2012 he was named the Majority Whip for the Senate, and was the Chairman of the Montgomery County Senate Delegation, Chairman of the Select Committee on Ethics Reform, and a Member of the Judicial Proceedings Committee.Raskin was a strong proponent of liberal issues in the Maryland Senate. He has been the sponsor of bills advocating same-sex marriage, the repeal of the death penalty in Maryland, the expansion of the state Ignition interlock device program, and the establishment of the legal guidelines for Benefit Corporations, a corporate form for-profit entities that wish to consider a material societal benefit in their bylaws and decision making process.A former board member of FairVote, Raskin introduced and sponsored the first bill in the country for the National Popular Vote, a plan for an interstate compact to provide for the first popular presidential election in American history.On March 1, 2006, during a Maryland State Senate hearing regarding same-sex marriage, Raskin, speaking as a constitutional law expert, told a lawmaker, "People place their hand on the Bible and swear to uphold the Constitution; they don't put their hand on the Constitution and swear to uphold the Bible."Raskin also introduced Senate legislation to legalize medical marijuana in Maryland in 2014. The bill was signed by Martin O'Malley and went into effect in January 2015.


== U.S. House of Representatives ==


=== 2016 campaign ===
The Baltimore Sun and The Washington Post reported that Raskin announced his campaign on April 19, 2015, stating that, "[m]y ambition is not to be in the political center, it is to be in the moral center." The district's seven-term incumbent, fellow Democrat Chris Van Hollen, gave up the seat to make an ultimately successful run for the United States Senate.Raskin won the crowded seven-way Democratic primary—the real contest in this heavily Democratic district—with 33 percent of the vote. The primary election was the most expensive House race in 2016. He won the general election, defeating Republican Dan Cox with 60 percent of the vote.


=== Tenure ===
In his first action as a Congressman, Raskin, with several other members of House of Representatives, objected to certifying the election of Donald Trump as President because of Russian interference in the election and voter suppression efforts. Vice President Joseph Biden ruled the objection out of order because it had to be sponsored by at least one member of each chamber, and there was no Senate sponsor.In late June 2017 Raskin was the chief sponsor of legislation to establish a congressional "oversight" commission with the authority to declare a President "incapacitated" and removed from office under the 25th Amendment to the United States Constitution.In April 2018, Raskin, together with Jared Huffman, Jerry McNerney, and Dan Kildee, launched the Congressional Freethought Caucus. Its stated goals include "pushing public policy formed on the basis of reason, science, and moral values", promoting the "separation of church and state," opposing discrimination against "atheists, agnostics, humanists, seekers, religious and nonreligious persons", among others. Huffman and Raskin will act as co-chairs.


=== Committee assignments ===
Committee on House Administration
Committee on the Judiciary (Vice-Ranking Member)
Subcommittee on the Constitution and Civil Justice
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, Homeland Security and Investigations
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
Subcommittee on Information Technology
Subcommittee on Interior, Energy and Environment


=== Party leadership and caucus membership ===
House Democratic Caucus, Senior Whip
House Democratic Steering and Policy Committee, Freshman Representative
Congressional Progressive Caucus, Vice Chair and Liaison to New Members
Congressional LGBT Equality Caucus
House Pro-Choice Caucus
House Public Education Caucus
House Quiet Skies Caucus
House 115th Class Caucus
House Baltic Caucus
Congressional Freethought Caucus
Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus
Congressional NextGen 9-1-1 Caucus


== Electoral history ==


== Personal life ==
Raskin is married to Sarah Bloom Raskin, who served as the Maryland Commissioner of Financial Regulation from 2007–2010, and was nominated by President Barack Obama to the Federal Reserve Board on April 28, 2010. On October 4, 2010, she was sworn in as a governor of the Federal Reserve Board by Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke. She served as the United States Deputy Secretary of the Treasury from March 19, 2014 – January 20, 2017. 
Raskin has been vegetarian since 2009.


== Publications ==
Raskin is the author of We the Students: Supreme Court Cases for and about Students, and Overruling Democracy: The Supreme Court versus the American People, Raskin, Maryam Ahranjani, and Andrew G. Ferguson co-authored Youth Justice in America. In 1994, Raskin and John Bonifaz coauthored The Wealth Primary: Campaign Fundraising and the Constitution


== See also ==
List of Jewish members of the United States Congress


== References ==


== External links ==
Congressman Jamie Raskin
Campaign website
Jamie Raskin at Curlie (based on DMOZ)

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress
Urban Legends Reference Pages: Politics (Jamie Raskin)
WCL Faculty Page
Appearances on C-SPAN