Jason Mark Lewis (born September 23, 1955) is an American politician and Republican Party member who is the U.S. Representative for Minnesota's 2nd congressional district. Before being elected, Lewis was a radio talk show host, political commentator, and writer. He worked in Denver, Charlotte and Minneapolis-St. Paul before hosting the nationally syndicated Jason Lewis Show from 2009 to 2014.


== Education ==
Lewis was born in 1955 in Waterloo, Iowa. He has a master's degree in political science from the University of Colorado at Denver as well as a Bachelor of Arts in education/business from the University of Northern Iowa.


== Radio career ==
Lewis's show was syndicated nationally by the Premiere Radio Networks and the Genesis Communications Network. Before that, he broadcast locally for ten years on KSTP in the Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area and then on WBT in Charlotte, North Carolina for three years. In 2006 Lewis moved back to Minnesota to the newly established KTLK-FM.On the February 17, 2009, episode of his show, Lewis announced that his show would be syndicated nationally, effective February 23, 2009. Since 2007, Lewis had been one of the most frequently used and most popular guest hosts of Rush Limbaugh's radio program, allowing him to reach a nationwide audience.On August 8, 2011, The Jason Lewis Show was picked up for national syndication by the Genesis Communications Network. On the July 31, 2014, episode, Lewis announced he was leaving the show to devote more time to a website he helped co-found.In 2018, CNN reviewed several months of audio from Lewis's radio show between 2009 to 2014, in which Lewis asked whether calling women sluts was "too politically incorrect" and questioned the humanity of single women who vote for birth control coverage, saying, "You can be bought off for that? ... I mean, boy, that's the — all the other issues — the Hispanic problem, social issues, class warfare, you know — we can figure out a way to tackle those. This one, if you're that far down the road and you say you're a human being, I've got my suspicions. You're not — you're without a brain. You have no — you have no cognitive function whatsoever if that's all it takes to buy you off." Lewis has since stood by his comments, and a spokesperson for him said of them that it was "his job to be provocative while on the radio."


== Writing ==
Lewis is the author of the 2011 book Power Divided is Power Checked: The Argument for States Rights. In bonus commentary added to the 2016 audiobook version, Lewis made the point that many state laws prohibit consensual conduct and most of those laws are decided by the states. In the book he writes that "slavery was mercifully conquered" and suggested that "emancipated compensation" was rejected by the Lincoln Administration – raising the question whether Abraham Lincoln "exploited the issue" of slavery to justify the "War Between the States." The book is a defense of federalism and called for a constitutional amendment allowing "any state to peaceably leave the union."


== Political campaigns ==


=== 1990 U.S. House campaign ===

In 1990, Lewis ran for Congress in Colorado's 2nd congressional district. He was defeated by incumbent Democrat David Skaggs. Lewis was mentioned as a possible candidate in 2014 against Senator Al Franken, but did not run.


=== 2016 U.S. House campaign ===

In October 2015, Lewis filed to run for U.S. Congress in Minnesota's 2nd congressional district, and was endorsed at the Minnesota Republican Party's convention on the 6th ballot on May 7, 2016. He won the four-way August primary with 46% of the vote.The race was widely considered one of 2016's most competitive congressional elections. Roll Call journalist Alex Roarty wrote that Lewis had not openly embraced Donald Trump, but that he had been "unafraid to embrace many of the presumptive presidential nominee's trademarks: tough talk, an aversion to political correctness, and a focus on border security."During the campaign, a number of Lewis's opinions from his radio and internet career were publicized by the news media, including comments he made about women and slavery. Lewis said on his radio show: "You've got a vast majority of young single women who couldn't explain to you what GDP means. You know what they care about? They care about abortion. They care about abortion and gay marriage. They care about 'The View.' They are non-thinking."In an update to his book on states' rights just before the campaign, Lewis questioned the federal government's role in outlawing slavery: "In fact, if you really want to be quite frank about it, how does somebody else owning a slave affect me? It doesn’t. If I don’t think it is right, I won’t own one, and people always say ‘well, if you don’t want to marry somebody of the same sex, you don’t have to, but why tell somebody else they can’t?' Uh, you know, if you don’t want to own a slave, don’t. But don’t tell other people they can’t."Lewis said, "liberal reporters and typical politicians may not like the bluntness of the way I've framed some issues in my career as a voice in the conservative movement" and that his comments were "taken out of context by his opponents and the media".On November 8, 2016, Lewis was elected to the United States House of Representatives, defeating Democrat Angie Craig and independent Paula Overby.


== Electoral history ==


== Political positions ==
As of October 2018, Lewis had voted with his party in 96.3% of votes in the 115th United States Congress and in line with Trump's position in 91%.


=== Vote Smart Political Courage Test ===
Vote Smart, a nonprofit, nonpartisan research organization that collects and distributes information on candidates for public office in the United States, "researched presidential and congressional candidates' public records to determine candidates' likely responses on certain key issues." According to its 2016 analysis, Lewis generally supports pro-life legislation, opposes income tax increases, opposes mandatory minimum sentences for nonviolent drug offenders, opposes federal spending, supports lowering taxes as a means of promoting economic growth, opposes requiring states to adopt federal education standards, supports the building of the Keystone Pipeline, opposes federal regulation of greenhouse gas emissions, opposes gun-control legislation, supports repealing the Affordable Care Act, supports requiring immigrants who are unlawfully present to return to their country of origin before they are eligible for citizenship, and opposes American intervention in Iraq and Syria beyond air support.


=== Criminal justice reform ===
Lewis authored a bill that would provide education and vocational training resources to at-risk youth and young criminal offenders instead of levying penalties against them for petty offenses. He reintroduced the SAFE Justice Act, a criminal justice reform bill supported by FAMM, the American Conservative Union, the NAACP, the ACLU, and Freedomworks.Lewis is a critic of the war on drugs, which he compares to failed policy of alcohol prohibition in America. He has cosponsored legislation to let states set their own policy on cannabis (without federal interference) and to remove cannabis from the list of Schedule I drugs.


=== Health care ===
Lewis supported the March 2017 version of the American Health Care Act (the GOP's bill to repeal the Affordable Care Act). On May 4, 2017, he voted to repeal the ACA (Obamacare) and pass the American Health Care Act.


=== LGBT rights ===
In 2011, Lewis said that prohibitions on same-sex marriage were not discriminatory against gay people, because they would still be free to marry those of the opposite sex. In 2013, Lewis argued against same-sex marriage, comparing gays to rapists, speeders and polygamists. Lewis said that prohibitions against same-sex marriage could not be legally challenged on the basis of discrimination, because rapists and speeders could not reasonably argue that they were being discriminated against by prohibitions on rape and speeding. Lewis said that "the gay-rights lobby is playing underhanded to get their will and in the process they are shredding the Constitution of this country."
Lewis has suggested that households headed by gay parents may be harming their children and that more research is needed to confirm that they are not harming the children: I’m still not convinced that it’s a great idea for children to grow up with two moms or two dads. Call me a Neanderthal. I’m not saying it’s bad. I don’t know. There hasn’t been some longitudinal long-term studies on this. But we’ve rushed to this judgment that growing up with two mommies is a wonderful experience. I don’t know. Maybe it’s not so wonderful. Maybe it could harm the kid.He has called the decision of school boards to allow transgender restrooms and locker rooms in public schools an "abomination".


=== Taxes and spending ===
Lewis voted for the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. He voted against the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, a bill that increased discretionary spending by $300 billion. After his vote, he said, "I ran for Congress to get the economy going again by reducing taxes, regulations, deficits and debt. A $300 billion increase in discretionary spending along with hiking the debt ceiling fails on all accounts."Lewis authored a bill that would mandate an audit of the Department of Defense. He later praised the department's decision to undergo an audit in 2018.


=== Women's issues ===
In 2018, CNN reviewed many hours of audiotape recorded during the years when Lewis served as a substitute host for Rush Limbaugh. The network focused broad public attention upon those remarks for the first time. Remarks Lewis made then included:“Does a woman now have the right to behave — and I know there’s a double standard between the way men chase women and running and running around — you know, I’m not going to get there, but you know what I’m talking about. But it used to be that women were held to a little bit of a higher standard.”  “We required modesty from women. Now, are we beyond those days where a woman can behave as a slut, but you can’t call her a slut?” “One of the reasons that the Democrats love the quote unquote female issue is because they know women vote more liberally than men do. Now you could say in a very, very sexist, misogynistic way that 'Well, that’s because women just don’t understand money. They don’t understand, they’re — they don’t handle finances. They’re guided by emotion, not reason. Why, that’s why they didn’t have the vote for a full century in the country'.”
Lewis defended his comments by stating that he was paid to be provocative and that "There's a difference between (being) a politician and a pundit." In 2011, Lewis decried laws prohibiting sexual harassment in the workplace, claiming such laws are unconstitutional because they interfere with free speech. That same year, Lewis mocked women who claimed to have been traumatized by unwanted sexual touching and kissing.


== References ==


== External links ==
U.S. House website
Campaign website
Jason Lewis at Curlie (based on DMOZ)

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress
Appearances on C-SPAN