Mark Eugene Amodei (; born June 12, 1958) is an American politician who has been the United States Representative for Nevada's second congressional district since 2011. Amodei, a Republican, previously served in the Nevada Assembly from 1997 to 1999 and in the Nevada Senate, representing the Capital District, from 1999 to 2010. After public office as state Senator, he served as chairman of the Nevada Republican Party until May 2011, when he stepped down in order to pursue the Republican nomination for Congress.  Amodei was the Republican candidate for the special election held on September 13, 2011, to replace Dean Heller in Nevada's second congressional district.


== Early life, education, and military service ==
Amodei was born in Carson City, Nevada, the son of Joy LaRhe (née Longero) and Donald Mark Amodei. His father was of half Italian and half Irish descent, and one of his maternal great-grandfathers was Italian. Amodei graduated from Carson High School in 1976, where he was student class president. He graduated from the University of Nevada in 1980, and received his law degree from the University of the Pacific's McGeorge Law School in 1983.
When Amodei entered the U.S. Army, he had not yet passed the bar exam. So, he was assigned to an artillery unit. Upon passing the bar, he became an Army JAG Corps officer prosecuting criminal matters, an Assistant U.S. Attorney and Assistant Post Judge Advocate. He was awarded the Army Achievement Medal, the Army Commendation Medal and the Meritorious Service Medal. He served with the United States Army Judge Advocate General Corps, from 1983 to 1987. Upon receiving an honorable discharge, he returned home to become an attorney with the law firms Allison MacKenzie in Carson City and Kummer Kaempfer Bonner Renshaw and Ferrario (now Kaempfer Crowell) in Reno, Nevada. He served as a lawyer with Allison, MacKenzie, et al. from 1987 to 2004 and with Kummer, et al. from 2004 to 2007.
As a lawyer, Congressman Amodei has been a sole practitioner from 2009 to the present. Prior to that, he served as the President of the Nevada Mining Association from 2007 to 2008.


== Nevada legislature ==


=== Elections ===
In 1996, he was elected to the Nevada Assembly, representing Carson City, the state capital. In 1998, he ran for the Nevada Senate in the Capital District. He defeated incumbent Democrat State Senator Ernie Adler 52%–48%. In 2002, he won re-election to a second term with 84% of the vote. In 2006, he won re-election to a third term with 78% of the vote.


=== Tenure ===
He was named the Outstanding Freshman Legislator in 1997.He was selected to serve as the President pro tempore of the Nevada State Senate.

2003 tax increaseAmodei was the co-author, with Democratic Senator Terry Care, of a plan in 2003 to increase taxes in Nevada by $1 billion. The plan was offered as an alternative to governor Kenny Guinn's tax plan, which called for over $1 billion in revenue increases. The final plan raised taxes by $873 million.
Collective bargainingIn 2009, Amodei supported a proposal to expand collect bargaining rights for state workers, who he believed were unfairly treated during the budget process.
Gas taxIn 2009, Amodei sponsored a bill that would have allowed for a gas tax increase in Washoe County; the plan gained public approval in an advisory vote.
Medical liability reformIn 2003, Amodei voted against a tort reform bill that would have changed Nevada's medical liability law. He was the only Republican Senator to vote against the bill.


=== Committee assignments ===
He has served on the Legislative Commission, Vice Chair of the Governor's Task Force on Access to Public Health Care, Education Commission of the States, Public Lands committee, the Tahoe Regional Planning Agency Legislative Oversight committee, Chairman of the Education Technology committee, and was a member of the Nevada Supreme Court's committee on Court Funding.


== 2010 U.S. Senate election ==

Amodei ran for the Republican nomination for U.S. Senate against Democrat Harry Reid, the Majority Leader. He dropped out before election day, as State Assemblywoman Sharron Angle won the primary and lost the general election to Reid.


== U.S House of Representatives ==


=== Elections ===
2011
On September 13, 2011, Nevada's second Congressional district elected Amodei to replace Congressman Dean Heller. Heller had been appointed to fill John Ensign's seat in the U.S. Senate, following Ensign's resignation from the position. Amodei announced his bid for the congressional seat in May 2011. The next month, he won the Republican nomination by taking 221 out of 323 ballots. In the primary, he defeated State Senator Greg Brower, who received 56 votes, and prominent U.S. Navy Veteran Kirk Lippold, who received 46 votes.Amodei defeated Democrat Kate Marshall 58%–36%. He won every county in the district, including Washoe and Mineral counties both with 52% of the vote.

2012
Amodei, who has represented Nevada's 2nd congressional district since being elected in a special election in September 2011, ran for re-election against Democrat Samuel Koepnick, an information technology employee for the state of Nevada.  Amodei has been endorsed by the National Rifle Association.Amodei defeated Koepnick 58%–36%. He won every county in the district, including Washoe with 52% of the vote.


=== Tenure ===
Mark Amodei was sworn in on September 15, 2011.Amodei voted against the bill to end the United States federal government shutdown of 2013.  Regarding the vote, Amodei stated: "During two campaigns, I told Nevadans I would give my full attention to such issues as reining in runaway federal spending, debt, and the harmful aspects of the Affordable Care Act. Unlike many in this town, I will not test your memories and hope you have forgotten. I will continue to pursue these necessary goals. Nothing in this legislation changes the real threats to our country’s economy."Amodei received a 0% rating from Planned Parenthood's 2014 Congressional Scorecard for supporting a nationwide abortion ban after 20 weeks and banning abortion access in the District of Columbia and through the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.


=== Legislation ===
On July 25, 2014, Amodei introduced the Northern Nevada Land Conservation and Economic Development Act (H.R. 5205; 113th Congress), a bill that would require the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to convey certain federal lands in Nevada to other government entities. The bill is a package of numerous other bills related to land conveyance in Nevada, which make up the bulk of Amodei's legislation.In total, Amodei has sponsored 45 bills, including:


==== 112th Congress (2011–2012) ====
H.R.3292: a bill to prohibit the further extension or establishment of national monuments in Nevada except by express authorization of Congress
H.R.3377: Pine Forest Range Recreation Enhancement Act of 2011, a bill to designate specified federal land managed by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) in Humboldt County, Nevada, and to be known as the Pine Forest Range Wilderness, as wilderness and as a component of the National Wilderness Preservation System (NWPS).
H.R.3815: Elko Motocross and Tribal Conveyance Act, a bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior to convey to Elko County, Nevada, without consideration, all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to approximately 275 acres of land managed by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), Elko District, Nevada, as depicted on the map as "Elko Motocross Park."
H.R.3996: Southern Nevada Higher Education Land Act of 2012, a bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior to convey three parcels of Bureau of Land Management (BLM) land to: (1) the Nevada System of Higher Education for the Great Basin College and the College of Southern Nevada; and (2) the System for the University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
H.R.4039: Yerington Land Conveyance and Sustainable Development Act, a bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior to convey to the city of Yerington, Nevada, all interest of the United States in the federal lands located in Lyon and Mineral Counties, Nevada, identified as "City of Yerington Sustainable Development Conveyance Lands" in exchange for consideration in an amount that is equal to their fair market value.
H.R.4402: National Strategic and Critical Minerals Production Act of 2012, a bill to streamline the permitting process for mineral development by coordinating the actions of federal agencies.
H.R.4976: Small Lands Tracts Conveyance Act, a bill to accelerate the process for transferring small parcels of federal land to local communities.
H.R.6184: Restoring Storey County Act, a bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior, through the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), to convey to Storey County, Nevada, all surface rights of the United States in and to specified federal land, including any improvements.
H.R.6236: a bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of Land Management and the Bureau of Reclamation, to convey, by quitclaim deed, to the City of Fernley, Nevada, all right, title, and interest of the United States, to any Federal land within that city that is under the jurisdiction of either of those agencies.
H.R.6282: a bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of Land Management, to convey to the City of Carlin, Nevada, in exchange for consideration, all right, title, and interest of the United States, to any Federal land within that city that is under the jurisdiction of that agency, and for other purposes.
H.R.6453: a bill to facilitate planning, permitting, administration, implementation, and monitoring of pinyon-juniper dominated landscape restoration projects within Lincoln County, Nevada, and for other purposes.
H.R.6496: a bill to reauthorize grants to enhance State and local efforts to combat trafficking in persons.
H.R.6497: Nevada Mining Townsite Conveyance Act of 2012, a bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), to convey, to the counties in which they are situated, all interest of the United States in certain mining townsites in Esmeralda and Nye Counties, Nevada.
H.R.6596: Naval Air Station Fallon Housing and Safety Development Act, a bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior to transfer to the Secretary of the Navy, without consideration, approximately 400 acres of federal land that is adjacent to Naval Air Station Fallon in Churchill County, Nevada, and that was withdrawn under a specified public land order.
H.AMDT.1303 to H.R.4480, an amendment to prohibit the Secretary of the Interior from moving any aspect of the Solid Minerals program administered by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to the Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM).


==== 113th Congress (2013–2014) ====
H.R.433: Pine Forest Range Recreation Enhancement Act of 2013, a bill to designate specified federal land managed by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) in Humboldt County, Nevada, and to be known as the Pine Forest Range Wilderness, as wilderness and as a component of the National Wilderness Preservation System.
H.R.761: National Strategic and Critical Minerals Production Act of 2013, a bill to streamline the permitting process for mineral development by coordinating the actions of federal agencies.
H.R.1167: Restoring Storey County Act, a bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior, through the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), to convey to Storey County, Nevada, all surface rights of the United States in specified federal land, including any improvements.
H.R.1168: a bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of Land Management, to convey to the City of Carlin, Nevada, in exchange for consideration, all right, title, and interest of the United States, to any Federal land within that city that is under the jurisdiction of that agency, and for other purposes.
H.R.1169: Naval Air Station Fallon Housing and Safety Development Act, a bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior to transfer to the Secretary of the Navy, without consideration, approximately 400 acres of federal land that is adjacent to Naval Air Station Fallon in Churchill County, Nevada, and that was withdrawn under a specified public land order.
H.R.1170: a  bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of Land Management and the Bureau of Reclamation, to convey, by quitclaim deed, to the City of Fernley, Nevada, all right, title, and interest of the United States, to any Federal land within that city that is under the jurisdiction of either of those agencies.
H.R.1633: Small Lands Tracts Conveyance Act, a bill to require the Director of the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) for a state (respecting certain public lands) or the Regional Forester (respecting certain National Forest System lands) to select an eligible federal lands parcel for conveyance: (1) in response to a request by an adjacent landholder (any holder of non-federal land that shares one or more boundaries with such a parcel and who requests to purchase such a parcel), or (2) upon the recommendation of the BLM District Office or System unit that exercises administration over such parcel.
H.R.1880: Protecting Resort Cities from Discrimination Act of 2013, a bill to prohibit a federal agency from establishing or implementing an internal policy that discourages or prohibits the selection of a travel, event, meeting, or conference location because it is perceived to be a resort or vacation destination.
H.R.2455: Nevada Native Nations Land Act, a bill which includes seven tribal lands measures, as well as a smaller purchase by the City of Elko.
H.R.3390: Lake Tahoe Restoration Act of 2013, a bill to reduce the threat of wildfire, improve water clarity, combat invasive species, and restore the environment in the Lake Tahoe Basin.
H.R.3716: Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe – Fish Springs Ranch Settlement Act, a bill to authorize and ratify the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe-Fish Springs Ranch 2013 Supplement to the 2007 Settlement Agreement, dated November 20, 2013, and entered into by the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe and the Fish Springs Ranch (Agreement).
H.R.5205: Northern Nevada Land Conservation and Economic Development Act, a bill to designate approximately 26,000 acres of land managed by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) in Humboldt County, Nevada, as the Pine Forest Range Wilderness.
H.AMDT.82 to H.R.2216 an amendment to provide that the $44 million in funding within the General Operating Expenses account of the Veterans Benefits Administration should be used for increased staffing in certain regional Veterans Affairs offices.


==== 114th Congress (2015–2016) ====
H.R.1937: National Strategic and Critical Minerals Production Act of 2015, a bill to streamline the permitting process for mineral development by coordinating the actions of federal agencies.
H.R.488: a bill to prohibit the further extension or establishment of national monuments in Nevada except by express authorization of Congress.
H.R.925: Douglas County Conservation Act of 2015, a bill to expand recreational opportunities, promotes conservation, and jump-starts economic development in Douglas County, Nevada.
H.R.1214: National Forest Small Tracts Act Amendments Act of 2015, a bill to amend the Small Tracts Act (the Act) to permit the sale, exchange, or interchange under such Act of National Forest System (NFS) lands the sale or exchange of which is not practicable under any other authority of the Department of Agriculture (USDA) which have a value determined to be not more than $500,000.
H.R.1484: Honor the Nevada Enabling Act of 1864 Act, a bill to direct the Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the Department of the Interior to convey, in phases and without consideration, to the state of Nevada all interest of the United States in federal lands owned, managed, or controlled by the federal government through the USDA or Interior for the purpose of permitting the state to use them to support select beneficiaries.
H.R.1485: Federal Lands Invasive Species Control, Prevention, and Management Act, a bill to direct the Department of the Interior and the Department of Agriculture to plan and carry out activities on lands directly managed by the department concerned to control and manage invasive species in order to inhibit or reduce their populations and to effectuate restoration or reclamation efforts.
H.R.2324: Small Lands Tracts Conveyance Act, a bill to accelerate the process for transferring small parcels of federal land to local communities.
H.R.2733: Nevada Native Nations Land Act, a bill to hold lands for six Nevada Tribes in trust.
H.R.926: To amend title 38, United States Code, to improve the provision of guide dogs to veterans blinded by a service-connected injury.
H.R.4298: Vietnam Helicopter Crew Memorial Act, a bill to This bill directs the Department of the Army to place in Arlington National Cemetery a memorial honoring helicopter pilots and crew members who served on active duty in the Armed Forces during the Vietnam era.
H.R.4688: Douglas County Economic Development and Conservation Act of 2016, a bill to direct the Forest Service to convey approximately 67 acres of certain Forest Service land (Lake Tahoe-Nevada State Park) to the state of Nevada for the conservation of wildlife or natural resources or for a public park.
H.RES.501: Expressing the sense of the House of Representatives that the United States postal facility network is an asset of significant value and the United States Postal Service should take appropriate measures to maintain, modernize and fully utilize the existing post office network for economic growth.


=== Committee assignments ===
114th Congress:

House Committee on AppropriationsSubcommittee on Interior, Environment and Related Agencies
Subcommittee on Financial Services and General Government
Subcommittee on the Legislative BranchIn the 112th and 113th Congress, Amodei served on the House Judiciary Committee, the House Committee on Natural Resources and the House Committee on Veterans Affairs:

House Judiciary CommitteeSubcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet
Subcommittee on Immigration and Border SecurityHouse Natural Resources CommitteeSubcommittee on National Parks, Forests, and Public Lands
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral ResourcesHouse Committee on Veterans AffairsSubcommittee on Economic Opportunity
Disability Assistance and Memorial Affairs


=== Caucus memberships ===
Congressional Western Caucus
Climate Solutions Caucus


== Electoral history ==


== Personal life ==
Amodei has two daughters: Erin, a nursing student at Truckee Meadows Community College, and Ryanne, a physician trainer on the DaVinci Robotic Surgical Instrument and former engineer in the U.S. Navy.


== References ==


== External links ==
Congressman Mark Amodei official U.S. House site
Amodei for Congress
Mark Amodei at Curlie (based on DMOZ)

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress