Michael Bruce Quigley (born October 17, 1958) is the U.S. Representative for Illinois's 5th congressional district, serving since the April 7, 2009 special election. The district includes most of Chicago's North Side, as well as several of the city's western suburbs. He is a member of the Democratic Party. Quigley is a former member of the Cook County Board of Commissioners, where he represented Chicago's northside neighborhoods of Lakeview, Uptown, and Rogers Park. He also teaches environmental policy and Chicago politics at Loyola University Chicago.


== Early life, education, and early political career ==
Quigley was raised in Carol Stream, Illinois, where he graduated from Glenbard North High School in 1977. He then attended Roosevelt University, where he earned his bachelor's degree. Quigley moved into the Lakeview area of Chicago in 1982, and became involved in community activities. He attended the Loyola University Chicago School of Law, where he earned a Juris Doctor degree, and the University of Chicago, where he earned a master's degree in public policy.
Quigley was first elected to the Cook County Board of Commissioners in 1998, succeeding Maria Pappas who was elected Cook County Treasurer. During his tenure, he has gained a reputation as a reformer, as he opposed tax hikes supported by Cook County Board President John Stroger, and later his son and successor Todd Stroger. He contended the county could operate more efficiently, and he presented reports to support the position. Quigley also challenged the practice of finding jobs for Democratic officials with the Cook County Forest Preserve District.Quigley and his wife Barbara have two daughters, Alyson and Meghan.


== U.S. House of Representatives ==


=== Elections ===
2009
In early 2009, incumbent Democrat U.S. Congressman Rahm Emanuel of Illinois's 5th congressional district resigned to become White House Chief of Staff to newly elected President Barack Obama. The congressional vacancy was filled via the special election. Quigley was one of twelve candidates to file for the special Democratic primary—the real contest in this heavily Democratic district. He was endorsed by the Chicago Sun-Times, which called him "a constant advocate for fiscal responsibility and a watchdog against waste and corruption". He was also endorsed by the Chicago Tribune, which cited Quigley's efforts to improve county government, noting, "If Quigley's ideas had all been put in place, the county would not be crying now for more money". He won the March special primary with 22% of the vote. The second-ranked candidate, State Representative John Fritchey received 18% of the vote, four points short. Following the primary, Quigley won the April special election with 69% of the vote over Republican challenger and militia leader Rosana Pulido.
2010
Quigley won re-election to his first full term in 2010 with 71% of the vote.
2012
After redistricting, Quigley's district was pushed into DuPage County. The new district absorbed the home of 13th District Republican Congresswoman Judy Biggert. However, Biggert opted to run for re-election in the 11th District, the successor to the old 13th. The old 5th is only slightly less Democratic than its predecessor; Obama won the district in 2008 with 70% (down three points from the old 5th), and 2010 Democratic U.S. Senate nominee Alexi Giannoulias carried it with 55% of the vote. No Democrat has filed to run against him. Only one Republican filed, self-employed businessman Dan Schmitt.
Gun controlIn May 2011, Quigley sponsored an amendment to the Patriot Act prohibiting the sale of weapons to those on the FBI's Terrorist Watch List. Quigley believed that the Republican limitation of civil liberties under the Patriot Act contradicted their unwillingness to limit Second Amendment rights. This bill, proposed as an amendment to the Patriot Act, came under fire from House Republicans Reps. James Sensenbrenner Jr. of Wisconsin and Louie Gohmert of Texas, who argued that this would infringe on the Second Amendment rights of those mistakenly placed on the Terrorist Watch List. However, in a vote dictated by political party, the bill lost 21–11 with the House Judiciary panel.
Public healthQuigley has received a rating of 100 (on a scale of 1 to 100) from the American Public Health Association, indicating his strong support of healthcare legislation. In April 2011, Quigley voted against Paul Ryan's budget plan (which involved budget cuts to Medicare, as well as decreased government funding to help citizens procure health insurance). Also in April 2011, Quigley voted against repealing the "Prevention and Public Health" fund, a fund focused on Community and Clinical Prevention of chronic diseases, as well as allotting money towards health-care infrastructure and research. Quigley also voted for increases in government spending on physical and occupational therapy.

EnvironmentA Sierra Club member since high school, Quigley initially joined politics because of his desire to help the environment through legislation. Quigley has enacted this desire through supporting the American Clean Energy and Security Act, a 2009 bill to create an emissions trading plan which passed in the House of Representatives, but was defeated in the Senate. Quigley also introduced the Federal Birdsafe Buildings Bill, a 2011 initiative to make all buildings built by the General Services Administration built with the maximum amount of bird-safe materials and features. In April 2011, Quigley voted to prohibit invasive research on great apes.

VeteransQuigley is a supporter of veterans' benefits, and has worked to improve healthcare and education opportunities for them. His district office is also known to make services available to veterans whenever they should need it, such as helping one veteran receive medals that he had been waiting for over twenty years to receive. In 2013, Quigley introduced a bill to the House to prevent Veterans from entering into debt to pay for tuition before GI benefits are received. He hopes to provide even greater educational opportunities to veterans with this bill.
AbortionQuigley supports abortion rights, and voted against banning federal health coverage for abortions. Quigley also supports federal funding for family planning and sex education, as well as creating more preventative steps to avoid unwanted pregnancies altogether.
Gay RightsQuigley is a supporter of LGBT rights, and showed his support in 2012 by participating in National Coming Out Day as a show of solidarity. He has called for the FDA to revoke its ban on allowing blood donations from gays.


=== Committee assignments ===


==== 115th Congress ====
Appropriations Committee
Subcommittee on Financial Services and General Government (FSGG)
Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies (THUD)
Intelligence Committee
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats
Subcommittee on the NSA and Cybersecurity


==== 114th Congress ====
Intelligence Committee


==== 113th Congress ====
Appropriations Committee
Subcommittee on Financial Services and General Government
Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies


==== 112th Congress ====
Committee on the Judiciary
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security
Subcommittee on the Constitution
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services and Bailouts of Public and Private Programs (Ranking Member)
Subcommittee on National Security, Homeland Defense and Foreign Operations


=== Caucus memberships ===
New Democrat Coalition
Congressional Arts Caucus
United States Congressional International Conservation Caucus
Veterinary Medicine Caucus


== Awards and recognition ==
In 2007, Quigley was inducted into the Chicago Gay and Lesbian Hall of Fame as a Friend of the Community.


== References ==


== External links ==
U.S. Congressman Mike Quigley official U.S. House site
Mike Quigley for Congress
Mike Quigley at Curlie (based on DMOZ)

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress