Terrycina Andrea Sewell (; born January 1, 1965) is an American politician of the Democratic Party serving as the U.S. Representative for Alabama's 7th congressional district since 2011. The 7th district includes most of the Black Belt, as well as most of the predominantly black portions of Birmingham, Tuscaloosa, and Montgomery.
Sewell is the first black woman elected to Congress from Alabama. Sewell is the only Democrat in Alabama's seven-member congressional delegation. Sewell and Republican Martha Roby, also elected in 2010, are the first women elected to Congress from Alabama in regular elections.A native of Selma, Sewell is a graduate of Princeton University, Harvard Law School, and Oxford University. She is a public finance attorney.


== Early life and education ==
Terrycina Sewell, known as "Terri," was raised in Selma, Alabama. She is the daughter of the late Andrew A. Sewell, a former high school basketball coach, and Nancy Gardner Sewell, a retired high school librarian and former City Councilwoman in Selma. Her mother was the first black woman elected to the Selma City Council. Both parents held careers in the Selma public school system.
Sewell was the first black valedictorian of Selma High School. Her mother's family was politically active, offering its homestead to activists who came for the 1965 Selma to Montgomery marches to gain voting rights. Sewell spent her childhood summers in Lowndes County, Alabama with her maternal grandparents. Her grandfather, a Primitive Baptist minister and a farmer, instilled in her a love for the land, an appreciation of hard work, and the importance of her faith. Her grandfather and the members of Beulah Primitive Baptist Church gave her a deep understanding of the Black Belt Region and its people.
Sewell graduated with honors from Princeton University and received a scholarship from U.S. News and World Report, among others. A lifelong Democrat, during the summers while in college, she worked on Capitol Hill for 7th congressional district congressman Richard Shelby, as well as for Senator Howell Heflin. She was a leader on the college campus, serving in various roles including class vice-president, class representative to the Student Union, and spearheading the admission office's effort to set up a Minority Student Recruitment office to recruit more minority students to the university.Upon graduation from college, Sewell was featured on NBC's Today Show as one of the "Top Collegian Women." She was chosen as one of the "Top Ten College Women in America" by Glamour Magazine. She received the Afro-American Studies Thesis Prize for her senior thesis, Black Women in Politics: Our Time Has Come, which featured a personal interview with Shirley Chisholm, the first black U.S. Congresswoman. Sewell continued her education, receiving a master's degree with first-class Honours from Oxford University with the support of a Marshall Scholarship. At the age of 25, she published her Masters' thesis on the election of the first black members of British parliament as a book titled, Black Tribunes: Race and Representation in British Politics (1993).Sewell attended Harvard Law School with the help of an NAACP Legal Defense Fund scholarship, graduating in 1992. In law school, she served as an editor of the Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review. She published an article titled "Selma, Lord, Selma," about the legal struggles in Selma, in the Harvard Black Letter Journal, (vol. 8, Spring 1991).


== Legal career ==
After graduation, Sewell served as a judicial law clerk in Birmingham, Alabama to the Chief Judge U. W. Clemon, United States District Court (AL-ND), who was the first black federal judge appointed in Alabama.
Sewell began her legal career in 1994 at the Wall Street law firm of Davis Polk & Wardwell. A securities lawyer for more than a decade, she gained experience in finance and the capital markets. Sewell provided free legal services to the homeless, mentored girls of color in NYC high schools through the program Dreams into Action, and served on the Alumni Advisory Board of Sponsors of Educational Opportunity (SEO), a not-for-profit organization providing education, leadership training and Wall Street internships to students of color. Through her involvement with SEO, she served as the co-chair of the Community Assistance Fund, which provided $300,000,000 of aid and assistance to organizations serving communities of color affected by the events of September 11, 2001.
Sewell returned to Alabama in 2004 to assist her mother in the care of her father. As the first black female partner in the Birmingham law firm of Maynard, Cooper, & Gale, P.C., Sewell has distinguished herself as one of the only black public finance lawyers in the State of Alabama. She served as a lawyer helping to raise money for public projects for some of the state's most underserved public entities, many in Alabama's 7th congressional district, including the City of Selma, Dallas County Water Authority, and Lowndes County Board of Education. Sewell made educational finance a particular focus of her practice, representing the historically black colleges in Alabama, including Alabama State University, Tuskegee University, and Stillman College, as well as other higher education institutions such as Wallace State-Hanceville, Jefferson State Community College, Chattahoochee Valley Community College, and the State of Alabama's Public Schools and University Authority.


== U.S. House of Representatives ==


=== Elections ===
2010
After four-term Democratic incumbent Artur Davis gave up the seat to run for governor, Sewell entered the Democratic primary—the real contest in this majority Democratic, majority-black district. She finished first in the four-way primary with 36.8 percent of the vote. In the runoff, she defeated Jefferson County commissioner Sheila Smoot with 55 percent of the vote.In the general election, Sewell defeated Republican opponent Don Chamberlain in a landslide, taking 72.4 percent of the vote to become the first black woman elected to Congress from Alabama.  The 7th is so strongly Democratic that Sewell essentially clinched her seat by winning the primary.
2012
Sewell was the only candidate to file for the Democratic nomination in 2012, and won the general election over Chamberlain as in 2010.
2014
Sewell was challenged in the Democratic primary by Tamara Harris Johnson, a former Birmingham City Attorney. No Republican candidate filed.  Sewell defeated Johnson with 83.9% of the primary vote, effectively clinching a third term.

2016Sewell was again unchallenged by a Republican in the 2016 general election.  She easily won a fourth term against a write-in opponent.


=== Tenure ===

Since being elected, Sewell has voted with her party 91% of the time, and she has been noted as a strong supporter of President Obama's policies. Despite this, for the 114th United States Congress, Sewell was ranked as the 94th most bipartisan member of the U.S. House of Representatives (and the most bipartisan member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Alabama) in the Bipartisan Index created by The Lugar Center and the McCourt School of Public Policy that ranks members of the United States Congress by their degree of bipartisanship (by measuring the frequency each member's bills attract co-sponsors from the opposite party and each member's co-sponsorship of bills by members of the opposite party). Sewell has established herself as a liberal with a focus on job creation. Sewell is a member of the Congressional Black Caucus.
TaxationSewell supported President Obama's plan to extend tax cuts for low- and middle-income Americans, but declined to discuss her stance on taxation for high-income Americans. In response to Obama's Framework for Business Tax Reform, Sewell said: "I applaud the President for outlining a bold framework for reforming the U.S. business tax system."In 2012 Sewell criticized Republican Presidential nominee Mitt Romney's tax returns and effective tax rates, saying "it should be about shared responsibility. I think that something is fundamentally wrong if a person of his great wealth is only paying 13.9 percent effective tax rate and most of Americans are paying 28, 30 percent and they make far less."
Foreign policySewell supported Obama's decisions regarding Afghanistan, citing "trust" for his policies. She was part of a bipartisan delegation to accompany Nancy Pelosi on a 2-day trip to Afghanistan in May 2012. While there, they spent time "with American service-members and meeting local officials to discuss security and women's issues."
Voting rightsIn 2017, Sewell was appointed vice chair of the Democratic National Committee's Commission on Protecting American Democracy from the Trump Administration, which aims to combat the Trump Administration's attempts at voter suppression. Former Missouri Secretary of State and president of Let America Vote Jason Kander serves as chair.


=== Committee assignments ===
Representative Sewell currently serves on the following House committees:
House Committee on Ways and Means
Subcommittee on Health
Subcommittee on Human Resources
Committee on Intelligence


=== Caucus memberships ===
New Democrat Coalition
Congressional Arts Caucus
Afterschool Caucuses


== Personal life ==
Terri Sewell served as co-chair of the Women's Fund "Voices Against Violence" inaugural campaign, which promoted women helping women to overcome domestic violence.  The campaign raised more than $70,000 in four months to fight domestic violence in Birmingham, providing funds to establish the first Domestic Violence Court in Birmingham Municipal Court.  Sewell led the effort to have Teach for America select Alabama's Black Belt region as a new site in 2010.
Sewell has served on numerous boards, including St. Vincent’s Foundation (elected Treasurer of the Board and Chair of its Finance Committee); Girl Scouts of Cahaba Council; the Alabama Chapter of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society; the Community Advisory Board for the UAB Minority Health and Research Center; the Governing Board of the Alabama Council on Economic Education; and she is a member of the Corporate Partners Council for the Birmingham Museum of Art.
Sewell was listed in the magazine Alabama Super Lawyers for 2008 and 2009. She was honored with the 2007 Minority Business "Rising Star" award by the Birmingham Business Journal (BBJ).  She was selected by the BBJ as one of the "Top Birmingham Women" in 2005.  She was a member of the class of 2006-2007 Leadership Birmingham, and a member of the YWCA's Women Leadership MOMENTUM class of 2007-2008. She was a member of the class of 2008-2009 Leadership Alabama.
Sewell is a lifetime member of Brown Chapel AME Church in Selma. She currently worships at Sixth Avenue Baptist Church in Birmingham.  She was selected to participate on the panel, "From Lincoln to Obama," for the Congressional Black Caucus' Annual Legislative Forum to discuss Southern politics.
She is an active member of Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority and The Links, Incorporated.
She was married in 1998 to Theodore Dixie of Huntsville, Alabama.


== Electoral history ==


== See also ==
List of African-American United States Representatives
Women in the United States House of Representatives


== References ==


== External links ==
Congresswoman Terri Sewell official U.S. House site
Terri Sewell for Congress
Terri Sewell at Curlie (based on DMOZ)

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress