Hugh Thompson Rice Jr. (born August 4, 1957) is the U.S. Representative for South Carolina's 7th congressional district. Elected to the 113th Congress in November 2012, he is a conservative Republican, supports the right to life movement and thinks the U.S. government has strayed from tenets of the Constitution. He was a member of the freshman class chosen to sit at the House Republican leadership table. Rice was chair of the Horry County Council until he resigned from the position on December 31.Rice won re-election in 2014. He defeated Democratic challenger Gloria Bromell Tinubu on November 4, 2014. He also defeated Bromell Tinubu in the general election on November 6, 2012.


== Early life, education and pre-congressional career ==
Rice was born in Charleston on August 4, 1957. He was four years old when his parents divorced, and his teacher mother took him and his brother Clay to Myrtle Beach. Rice’s first job was a busboy when he was 12, and he was variously a night shift fry cook, a grocery store bag boy and miniature golf course manager while still in high school. Rice was 16 when his father died.
Rice had a scholarship to Duke University but enrolled at the University of South Carolina in Columbia, where he earned a master's degree in accounting in 1979 and a law degree in 1982.
After college, he worked at the accounting/consulting firm of Deloitte & Touche in Charlotte, where he earned his CPA certificate. In 1985 he returned to Myrtle Beach to practice tax law with the Van Osdell law firm, then established his own practice, Rice & MacDonald, in 1997. He was elected chair of Horry County Council in 2010.


== U.S. House of Representatives ==


=== Elections ===
Rice won election in the U.S. Congress elections, 2012 for the U.S. House, representing South Carolina's South Carolina's 7th congressional district. Rice defeated Jay Jordan, Randal Wallace, Dick Withington, James Mader, Chad Prosser, Katherine Jenerette, and Renee Culler in the Republican primary on June 12, 2012 to advance to a runoff. He defeated major rival Andre Bauer in the run-off election on June 26, 2012 Rice defeated Gloria Bromell Tinubu (D) in the general election on November 6, 2012.Rice won re-election in 2014 defeating Democratic challenger Gloria Bromell Tinubu with 60.15 percent of the votes over Rommel-Tinubu's 39.85 percent.


=== Tenure ===
Rice has co-sponsored several pieces of legislation including Safe Schools Act of 2013, a bill to repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and health care-related provisions in the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 and others.Rice has pushed changes to port funding, offered victims help to replace Social Security cards, and other federal documents after massive fire destroys 26 condo buildings, made statements on President Obama's press conferences, made a statement on the passage of the Require a PLAN Act, and made a statement on the President's State of the Union Address.Rice is a member of the Republican Study Committee and the United States Congressional International Conservation Caucus.


=== Committee assignments ===
United States House Committee on Ways and Means
In early November 2015, Rice was appointed by the United States House of Representatives to the United States House Committee on Ways and Means. On November 18, 2015, Congressman Kevin Brady appointed Rice to the Oversight, Social Security, and Human Resources subcommittees.Past Committee assignments

Committee on the Budget
Committee on Small Business
Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax and Capital Access (Chair)
Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight and Regulations
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation
Subcommittee on Highways and Transit
Subcommittee on Water Resources and EnvironmentIn early December 2012, Rice was appointed by the United States House of Representatives to the United States House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, United States House Committee on the Budget and United States House Committee on Small Business of the 113th Congress.On January 8, 2013, Congressman Sam Graves (R-MO) appointed Rice chairman of the Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax and Capital Access. Graves said that Rice would be a "great fit" because of his knowledge about the challenges facing small business owners. Rice said he would "work to limit government overreach, enact serious tax reform, and lower the cost of doing business in America, so our small business owners—America’s economic engine—can compete in our economy and the global marketplace."On January 22, 2013, Rice was appointed to the following  subcommittees: Highways and Transit, Water Resources and Environment, and Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation. Rice said the appointments would allow him to work for the funding and construction of Interstate 73 as well as the dredging of the Georgetown Port.On November 11, 2013, Rice was appointed to the water resources conference committee which is to help resolve differences between the U.S. House and Senate versions of the Water Resources Reform and Development Act of 2013. The version that has recently passed the House would allow for the dredging of the Georgetown port which is a $33 million project and would bring an estimated $30 million annual economic boost to the local economy. In a press release from his office Congressman Rice stated, "My district sent me to Washington to work on our infrastructure needs and the needs of the state," and, "Since joining the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, I have made it my goal to do whatever it takes to champion South Carolina's ports."


== Electoral history ==


== Personal life ==
Rice and his family reside in Myrtle Beach. In his free time he enjoys fishing, hunting, golfing and spending time with his family and friends. He married his wife, Wrenzie, in 1982 and they have three adult sons; H.T., Jacob, and Lucas.


== References ==


== External links ==
Congressman Tom Rice - official U.S. House site
Tom Rice for Congress
Tom Rice at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Appearances on C-SPAN

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress