Harold Watson "Trey" Gowdy III (born August 22, 1964) is an American attorney, politician and former federal prosecutor serving as the U.S. Representative for South Carolina's 4th congressional district since 2011. His district includes much of the Upstate region of South Carolina, including Greenville and Spartanburg.
Before his congressional career, Gowdy served as a federal prosecutor in the District of South Carolina from 1994 to 2000 and then as the solicitor (district attorney) for South Carolina's Seventh Judicial Circuit, comprising Spartanburg and Cherokee counties, from 2000 to 2010. From 2014 to 2016, Gowdy chaired the United States House Select Committee on Events Surrounding the 2012 Terrorist Attack in Benghazi which was partly responsible for discovering the existence of Hillary Clinton's private email server. His investigative committee spent over two and a half years and $7.8 million investigating the events surrounding the 2012 Benghazi attack, ultimately finding no evidence of specific wrong-doing by then-Secretary of State Clinton. Gowdy pressed for the prosecution of Hillary Clinton during the 2016 presidential campaign. Since 2017 he chairs the House Oversight Committee.
On January 31, 2018, Gowdy announced he would not seek re-election in 2018 and that he intends to pursue a legal career instead of politics.


== Early life ==
Trey Gowdy was born on August 22, 1964, in Greenville, South Carolina. He is the son of Novalene (née Evans) and Harold Watson "Hal" Gowdy, Jr, MD. He grew up in Spartanburg, where, as a young man, he delivered newspapers for the local daily and worked at the community market. Gowdy graduated from Spartanburg High School (1982) and earned a Bachelor of Arts in History from Baylor University (1986).  While at Baylor, he was a member of Kappa Omega Tau.  He received his Juris Doctor from the University of South Carolina (1989).Gowdy is married to Terri (née Dillard) Gowdy, a former Miss Spartanburg and 2nd runner up for Miss South Carolina. The couple has two children, Watson and Abigail. Terri Dillard Gowdy is a Teacher's Aide in the Spartanburg School District.


== Legal career ==
Gowdy clerked for John P. Gardner on the South Carolina Court of Appeals as well as for federal judge George Ross Anderson Jr. of the United States District Court for the District of South Carolina. He then went into private practice before being appointed an Assistant United States Attorney in April 1994. Gowdy would later be awarded the Postal Inspector's Award for the successful prosecution of J. Mark Allen, one of "America's Most Wanted" suspects.
In February 2000, he left the United States Attorney's Office to run for 7th Circuit Solicitor. He defeated incumbent Solicitor Holman Gossett in the Republican primary. He ran unopposed in the general election. Gowdy was re-elected in 2004 and 2008, both times unopposed. During his tenure, he appeared in four episodes of the television program Forensic Files, as well as Dateline NBC and SCETV. He prosecuted the full set of criminal cases, including seven death penalty cases.


== Congress ==


=== 2010 ===

In the summer of 2009, Gowdy, announced that he would challenge incumbent Republican U.S. Congressman Bob Inglis in the Republican primary for South Carolina's 4th congressional district.
Inglis, who got a 93% lifetime rating from the American Conservative Union, angered the conservative wing of the Republican Party by taking stances that were perceived to be more moderate than those he had taken when he first represented the district from 1993 to 1999; besides opposing elements in his own party on issues including climate change, he attracted attention as a member of the Judiciary Committee for providing the deciding vote that prevented a measure designed to protect the phrase "under God" in the Pledge of Allegiance from coming to the House floor. He drew five Republican challengers, including Gowdy. Like most of the challengers, Gowdy ran well to Inglis' right. In the June 2010 primary, Gowdy ranked first with 39% of the vote, short of the 50% majority threshold to win outright and avoid a run-off. Inglis received 27% of the vote. Jim Lee got 14%, State Senator David L. Thomas got 13%, and former Historian of the United States House of Representatives Christina Jeffrey was last with 7% of the vote.In the run-off election, Gowdy defeated Inglis 70–30%. The 4th district was considered so heavily Republican that it was widely presumed Gowdy had clinched a seat in Congress with his primary victory. Gowdy defeated Democratic nominee Paul Corden 63–29%.


=== 2012 ===

Gowdy ran for re-election to a second term against Democrat Deb Morrow. During redistricting following the 2010 census, one proposed map saw large portions of Gowdy's home county of Spartanburg County cut out of the district, while leaving all of Greenville County within the district. Gowdy was initially quoted as being "disappointed" with the version, even though the redrawn 4th would have been as solidly Republican as its predecessor. The final map moved a portion of Greenville County to the 3rd district while leaving all of Spartanburg County in the 4th district. Gowdy was quoted as being "pleased" with this version, since Greenville and Spartanburg counties remained linked. Roll Call rated his district as Safe Republican in 2012. Gowdy easily secured a second term, defeating Morrow 65–34%.


=== 2014 ===

Gowdy ran for re-election again in 2014. His only opponent was Libertarian Curtis E. McLaughlin. He was reelected with 85% of the popular vote.


=== 2016 ===
In the November 2016 election, Gowdy faced Democrat Chris Fedalei, a  26-year-old attorney. Trey Gowdy defeated Chris Fedalei with 67% of the vote to retain his seat.


== U.S. House of Representatives ==


=== Tenure ===
According to Politico, during his tenure in Congress, Gowdy was "considered one of the GOP's most versatile and skilled legal experts, owing to his background as a federal prosecutor." While chairing the House Oversight Committee, Gowdy tackled high-profile investigations. Democrats criticized Gowdy for conducting his investigations in a partisan fashion. After Trump became President, Gowdy defended the FBI and Special Counsel Robert Mueller's investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election to the dismay of Trump supporters. However, in a June 2018 hearing, Gowdy urged Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein to wrap up the special counsel investigation. Rosenstein rejected the suggestion, saying the special counsel investigation should finish "appropriately". Democrats criticized Gowdy for not fully pursuing investigations into potential conflicts of interest in the Trump White House or investigating the White House security clearance process.In August 2011 during the 2011 United States debt ceiling crisis, Gowdy opposed Speaker John Boehner's debt limit bill, and he voted against the final debt ceiling agreement.  He also opposed the 2011 defense authorization bill, citing concerns about the prospect of Americans being detained without trial on national security grounds. In December 2010, he told Congressional Quarterly that he would support a measure only if its sponsor could demonstrate that the Constitution gave the government the power to act in a particular realm.Gowdy worked on the Committee on the Judiciary, the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, and the Committee on Education and the Workforce. Gowdy frequently speaks on the floor of the House on issues ranging from Operation Fast and Furious to his support for reauthorization of the Violence Against Women Act.
In 2012, he received the Defender of Economic Freedom award from the fiscally conservative 501(c)4 organization Club for Growth. The award is given to members of Congress who have the year's highest ranking, according to the Club for Growth's metrics. Gowdy scored 97 out of 100, and was one of 34 congressmen given the award.An ardent social conservative, Gowdy considers himself "pro-life plus." He not only believes "in the sanctity of life," but argues that "the strategy should be broader than waiting for the Supreme Court to revisit Roe v. Wade."Trey Gowdy signed the Contract from America, which aims to defund, repeal, and replace the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, limit United States Environmental Protection Agency regulations, enact a reform of the federal tax code, pass a balanced budget amendment, and end earmarks.In May 2018, Gowdy challenged President Trump's unsubstantiated conspiracy theory that the FBI had spied on his 2016 presidential campaign. As a result of this, Gowdy was attacked by various Trump allies, and Politico reported that Gowdy was "virtually alone, getting little support from his House colleagues." In June 2018, Speaker Paul Ryan came out in support of Gowdy, saying that Gowdy's assessment was "accurate".At a July 2018 congressional hearing, Gowdy suggested impropriety on behalf of FBI agent Peter Strzok and said that Strzok showed bias against Trump and for Clinton during the 2016 presidential election and that this shaped his work for the FBI. During the hearing, Gowdy repeatedly pressed Strzok about a text message in which Strzok said "we'll stop Trump". Strzok explained that a "We'll stop Trump" text message was written late at night and off-the-cuff shortly after Trump denigrated the immigrant family of a fallen American war hero, and that the message reflected Strzok's belief that Americans would not vote for a candidate who engaged in such "horrible, disgusting behavior". Strzok said the message "was in no way—unequivocally—any suggestion that me, the FBI, would take any action whatsoever to improperly impact the electoral process for any candidate." Strzok added that he knew of information during the 2016 presidential campaign that could have damaged Trump but that he never contemplated leaking it. Strzok's said that the investigation into him and the Republicans' related rhetoric was misguided and played into "our enemies' campaign to tear America apart."


=== Legislation ===
On March 4, 2014, Gowdy introduced the ENFORCE the Law Act of 2014 (H.R. 4138; 113th Congress) into the House. The bill would give the United States House of Representatives and the United States Senate both the standing to sue the President of the United States in a federal district court to clarify a federal law (that is, seek a declaratory judgment) in the event that the executive branch is not enforcing the law. House Republicans argued that the bill was necessary because the Obama Administration refused to enforce the laws. H.R. 4138 has passed the House but has yet to become law.


=== Committee assignments ===
Committee on the Judiciary
Subcommittee on Constitution and Civil Justice
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, Homeland Security and Investigations (Chairman)
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform (Chairman)
Subcommittee on Health Care, Benefits and Administrative Rules
Subcommittee on Intergovernmental Affairs
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence
Republican Study Committee


== Presidential politics ==
In July 2015, Republican nominee Donald Trump named Gowdy as a possible nominee for United States Attorney General in a Trump cabinet. In late December 2015, Gowdy endorsed Senator Marco Rubio for president, praising him as a rarity among elected officials for having kept his campaign promises. Gowdy's endorsement strained his relations with Donald Trump's campaign; Trump said that Gowdy had "failed miserably on Benghazi".  Rubio withdrew from the race in March, after losing his home state of Florida to Trump. Two months later, on May 20, Gowdy endorsed Trump for president, admitting that while he was a "Rubio guy", he would support the presumptive Republican nominee. 
After the dismissal of FBI Director Comey, Gowdy was being considered for his replacement. However, the veteran representative told Attorney General Sessions that he wanted to remain in his congressional seat.On December 1, 2017, the Congressional Office of Compliance said that while Gowdy was acting as chairman of the House Select Committee on Benghazi, a former congressional aide who alleged he was fired in part because he was not willing to focus his investigative work on Hillary Clinton (a charge which was later dropped) and because he was absent from the position while fulfilling an Air Force Reserve assignment, reached a settlement with Congress and the House Employment Counsel. An attorney for the former aide stated that "I can confirm that my client is one person who brought a veterans status discrimination and retaliation suit against Congress and that the case settled on terms that were satisfactory to my client.” It was alleged by Elise Viebeck of ‘’PowerPost’’ that Rep. Gowdy was responsible for use of taxpayer funds to pay the claim against the government.


== Electoral history ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Congressman Trey Gowdy official U.S. House site
Trey Gowdy for Congress
Trey Gowdy at Curlie (based on DMOZ)

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Profile at Vote Smart
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress
Appearances on C-SPAN
Profile at Spartanburg County Government site